README.md, before:

Capsicum Object-Capabilities on Linux
=====================================

This repository is used for the development of
[Capsicum](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/security/capsicum/) object
capabilities in the Linux kernel.

This functionality is based on:

 - the original Capsicum implementation in FreeBSD 9.x,
   written by Robert Watson and Jonathan Anderson.
 - the
   [Linux kernel implementation](http://git.chromium.org/gitweb/?p=chromiumos/third_party/kernel-capsicum.git;a=shortlog;h=refs/heads/capsicum)
   written by Meredydd Luff in 2012.

The current functionality is based on the 3.11.1 upstream kernel.

Functionality Overview
----------------------

Capsicum introduces a new kind of file descriptor, a *capability*, which has a
limited set of rights associated with it.  Operations on a capability that are
not allowed by the associated rights are rejected (with `ENOTCAPABLE`).  New
capabilities can only have a subset of the rights of an existing file
descriptor/capability.

Capsicum also introduces *capability mode*, which disables (with `ECAPMODE`)
all syscalls that access any kind of global namespace.

Taken together, these features allow userspace code to effectively sandbox
itself, by:

 - creating capabilities (with limited rights) to files and sockets that are
   definitely needed by the process
 - closing all other file descriptors
 - entering capability mode (which means that new, non-capability, file
   descriptors can't be opened.

As process management normally involves a global namespace (that of `pid_t`
values), Capsicum also introduces a *process descriptor* and related syscalls,
which allows processes to be manipulated as another kind of file descriptor.

Building
--------

Capsicum support is currently included for x86_64 and user-mode Linux.  The
configuration parameters that need to be enabled are:

 - `CONFIG_64BIT`: Capsicum support is currently only implemented for 64 bit mode.
 - `CONFIG_PROCDESC`: enable Capsicum process-descriptor functionality.
 - `CONFIG_SECURITY`: enable Linux Security Module (LSM) support.
 - `CONFIG_SECURITY_PATH`: enable LSM hooks for path operations
 - `CONFIG_SECURITY_CAPSICUM`: enable the Capsicum LSM.
 - `CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY_CAPSICUM`, `CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY="capsicum"`: set Capsicum
   as default LSM.

User-mode Linux is used for Capsicum testing, and requires the following
additional configuration parameters:

 - `CONFIG_DEBUG_FS`: enable debug filesystem.

The following configuration options are also useful for development:

 - `CONFIG_DEBUG_KMEMLEAK`: enable kernel memory leak detection.
 - `CONFIG_DEBUG_BUGVERBOSE`: verbose bug reporting.

Testing
-------

The capsicum-linux currently includes test scripts in the
`tools/testing/capsicum_tests/` directory, although the (user-space) tests themselves are
in the separate [capsicum-test](https://github.com/google/capsicum-test) repository.

These test scripts currently expect specific build configurations (replacing the
`-j 5` flag with an appropriate parallelization factor for the local machine):

 - For user-mode Linux, the kernel should be built with ``make -j 5 ARCH=um
   O=`pwd`/build/ linux`` (i.e. the old-style `linux` target is required, and the
   output tree is expect to be under the `build/` subdirectory).

 - For native Linux (including VMs), the kernel should be built with
   ``make -j 5 O=`pwd`/build-native``


UML Testing Setup
-----------------

Create a file to use as the disk for user-mode Linux (UML):

    # Create (sparse) empty file
    dd if=/dev/zero of=tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test.img bs=1 count=0 seek=500GB
    # Make an ext3 filesystem in it
    mke2fs -t ext3 -F tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test.img

Mount the new file system somewhere:

    sudo mount -o loop tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test.img /mnt

Put an Ubuntu base system onto it:

    sudo debootstrap --arch=amd64 raring /mnt http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu

Replace some key files:

    sudo cp /mnt/sbin/init /mnt/sbin/init.orig
    sudo cp tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test-files/init /mnt/sbin/init
    sudo cp /mnt/etc/fstab /mnt/etc/fstab.orig
    sudo cp tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test-files/fstab /mnt/etc/fstab
    sudo umount /mnt

Copy test binaries into the test directory:

    pushd ${CAPSICUM-TEST} && make && popd
    cp ${CAPSICUM-TEST}/capsicum-test test-files/
    cp ${CAPSICUM-TEST}/mini-me test-files/
    cp ${CAPSICUM-TEST}/mini-me.noexec test-files/

Tests can then be run with the wrapper scripts:

    cd tools/testing/capsicum_tests
    ./run-test-on-last-build ./capsicum-test

Under the covers the `init` script will mount `tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test-files/`
as `/tests/` within the UML system, and will run tests from there.  The specific
test command to run is communicated into the UML instance as a `runtest=<cmd>` parameter
to the UML kernel (which the `init` script retrieves from `/proc/cmdline`).

Commit message:

capsicum: tidy comments and documentation
Use consistent terminology, in the hope of avoiding any confusion
with POSIX.1e capabilities:
 - 'capability FD' for a file descriptor (int) with associated rights
 - 'Capsicum capability' for a struct file object that wraps an
   underlying normal struct file

README.md, after:

Capsicum Object-Capabilities on Linux
=====================================

This repository is used for the development of
[Capsicum](http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/research/security/capsicum/) object
capabilities in the Linux kernel.

This functionality is based on:

 - the original Capsicum implementation in FreeBSD 9.x,
   written by Robert Watson and Jonathan Anderson.
 - the
   [Linux kernel implementation](http://git.chromium.org/gitweb/?p=chromiumos/third_party/kernel-capsicum.git;a=shortlog;h=refs/heads/capsicum)
   written by Meredydd Luff in 2012.

The current functionality is based on the 3.11.1 upstream kernel.

Functionality Overview
----------------------

Capsicum introduces a new kind of file descriptor, a *capability* file
descriptor, which has a limited set of *rights* associated with it.  Operations
on a capability FD that are not allowed by the associated rights are rejected
(with `ENOTCAPABLE`), and the rights associated with a capability FD can only
be narrowed, not widened.

Capsicum also introduces *capability mode*, which disables (with `ECAPMODE`)
all syscalls that access any kind of global namespace.

Taken together, these features allow userspace code to effectively sandbox
itself, by:

 - creating capability FDs (with limited rights) for files and sockets that are
   definitely needed by the process
 - closing all other file descriptors
 - entering capability mode (which means that new, non-capability, file
   descriptors can't be opened.

As process management normally involves a global namespace (that of `pid_t`
values), Capsicum also introduces a *process descriptor* and related syscalls,
which allows processes to be manipulated as another kind of file descriptor.

Building
--------

Capsicum support is currently included for x86_64 and user-mode Linux.  The
configuration parameters that need to be enabled are:

 - `CONFIG_64BIT`: Capsicum support is currently only implemented for 64 bit mode.
 - `CONFIG_PROCDESC`: enable Capsicum process-descriptor functionality.
 - `CONFIG_SECURITY`: enable Linux Security Module (LSM) support.
 - `CONFIG_SECURITY_PATH`: enable LSM hooks for path operations
 - `CONFIG_SECURITY_CAPSICUM`: enable the Capsicum LSM.
 - `CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY_CAPSICUM`, `CONFIG_DEFAULT_SECURITY="capsicum"`: set Capsicum
   as default LSM.

User-mode Linux is used for Capsicum testing, and requires the following
additional configuration parameters:

 - `CONFIG_DEBUG_FS`: enable debug filesystem.

The following configuration options are also useful for development:

 - `CONFIG_DEBUG_KMEMLEAK`: enable kernel memory leak detection.
 - `CONFIG_DEBUG_BUGVERBOSE`: verbose bug reporting.

Testing
-------

The capsicum-linux currently includes test scripts in the
`tools/testing/capsicum_tests/` directory, although the (user-space) tests themselves are
in the separate [capsicum-test](https://github.com/google/capsicum-test) repository.

These test scripts currently expect specific build configurations (replacing the
`-j 5` flag with an appropriate parallelization factor for the local machine):

 - For user-mode Linux, the kernel should be built with ``make -j 5 ARCH=um
   O=`pwd`/build/ linux`` (i.e. the old-style `linux` target is required, and the
   output tree is expect to be under the `build/` subdirectory).

 - For native Linux (including VMs), the kernel should be built with
   ``make -j 5 O=`pwd`/build-native``


UML Testing Setup
-----------------

Create a file to use as the disk for user-mode Linux (UML):

    # Create (sparse) empty file
    dd if=/dev/zero of=tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test.img bs=1 count=0 seek=500GB
    # Make an ext3 filesystem in it
    mke2fs -t ext3 -F tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test.img

Mount the new file system somewhere:

    sudo mount -o loop tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test.img /mnt

Put an Ubuntu base system onto it:

    sudo debootstrap --arch=amd64 raring /mnt http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu

Replace some key files:

    sudo cp /mnt/sbin/init /mnt/sbin/init.orig
    sudo cp tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test-files/init /mnt/sbin/init
    sudo cp /mnt/etc/fstab /mnt/etc/fstab.orig
    sudo cp tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test-files/fstab /mnt/etc/fstab
    sudo umount /mnt

Copy test binaries into the test directory:

    pushd ${CAPSICUM-TEST} && make && popd
    cp ${CAPSICUM-TEST}/capsicum-test test-files/
    cp ${CAPSICUM-TEST}/mini-me test-files/
    cp ${CAPSICUM-TEST}/mini-me.noexec test-files/

Tests can then be run with the wrapper scripts:

    cd tools/testing/capsicum_tests
    ./run-test-on-last-build ./capsicum-test

Under the covers the `init` script will mount `tools/testing/capsicum_tests/test-files/`
as `/tests/` within the UML system, and will run tests from there.  The specific
test command to run is communicated into the UML instance as a `runtest=<cmd>` parameter
to the UML kernel (which the `init` script retrieves from `/proc/cmdline`).
